Chapter 1 The History of Computers

	The future lies in our past. Should we explore the development of an object, the best way would be to learn from its history.
	The term "Computer Software" has only been around for a few decades. During these years, computer software has evolved from hardware dependent instructions to code which is portable and platform independent, and in recent years we have seen the boom in web applications implemented in many public fields and markets. To date, computer software has gone through many iterations. The underlying factors in the rapid development of computer software are the experience gained in the decades of using computers and the knowledge and methods gained in centuries of developing computational skills as well as the evolution of humanity itself, as shown in Figure 1-1. This is how we've been able to achieve rapid progress in software development and evolution, which contributes to the formation of the culture of computers and computer software.
	If we were to dive deeper into the characteristics and progressions of software in its various ages, further understand the origins of software and software culture, we would need to discuss the history involved, for which we would have to trace back to the roots of the history of computation of to understand the bond between computers and humanity.
	You would probably see history as either boring and tedious or fascinating and educative. But no matter what side you're on, let us begin our journey down the line of history of computation and computers, and explore the reasons behind our species' needs for computers.
	This chapter divides the ages of computers based on the most popular method used by scholars worldwide, and will attempt to demonstrate it clearly to the reader.

1.1 From Fingers to Computers
	Computers have played an important role in the continued development of human civilization.
	From the early ages of civilization, computation has been a major issue for societies. Whether if it's recording events or sustaining the growth of production, development of commerce or the advancements in science and technology, computational power has always been a prerequisite for these events to take place. We have evolved from using fingers to count, to using bargaining chips or an abacus, and have striven to improve on the speed, range and accuracy of our calculations.
	It is these efforts to improve our computational power that led us to the birth of computers.
1.1.1 Early Calculation Tools
	It is probable that no one will really know when humanity first encountered computational problems. Archaeological findings suggest that in the Paleolithic age humans have already used carvings on bones and stone to represent some sort of calculation. As civilization progressed, the calculations needed in the daily lives of people gradually increased in range and complexity. This need forced humans to find more efficient and accurate ways of conducting calculations.
	And of course, counting fingers would be the first method of calculation.
	Since our fingers are relatively flexible and easy to use, the method of counting fingers is highly influential. Our binary system of counting numbers may have originated from using our ten fingers to count. Even today as we are developing more and more sophisticated computers, using fingers represent simple numbers have assisted people in exchanging numbers. In ancient China, there even existed a practice in which people used fingers to bargain. In those ages, people wore long and loose clothes with spacious sleeves. When bargaining, people would either pull up their overalls or extend their right hand out of their sleeves, and would bargain inside sleeves or overalls. During this process, holding the index finger would mean one, both the index finger and middle finger would represent two, if the ring finger is added then it would express the number three, and adding the pinkie would mean five. For numbers above five, holding the thumb and the pinkie would mean six, while holding the thumb, index finger and middle finder would mean seven, the thumb and index finger extended would convey eight, the index finger curved into a hook would mean nine. Using this method of bargaining, one side would be giving finger gestures while the other side would say whether or not to agree on this price. This approach allows the buyer and seller to communicate in a covert fashion to protect their interests. This method was suitable under those circumstances, and in addition became a cultural feature and has gradually been handed down to this date.
	Despite having apparent advantages, counting with fingers is also deeply flawed, with a narrow range of calculation in addition to being volatile, meaning the results of the calculation cannot be preserved for a long period of time. It gradually phased out due to its flaws and people then began to explore other methods of calculation.
	The intelligence of humans have enabled us to use other forms of calculation, such as rope counting and bargaining disks. They have made calculation for humans convenient, and in this collection of calculation tools, the abacus would probably be most familiar with us.
1. The Abacus
	The abacus is a traditional Chinese calculating tool, and the oldest one that still exists today. It was developed from counting rods and was once the most widely used calculation tool worldwide.
	There have been many claims about the origins of the abacus, one of which dates the birth of the abacus to 600 B.C. During the final years of Eastern Han Dynasty, the book Shu Shu Ji Yi by the mathematician Xu Yue recorded fourteen ways of calculation, where the thirteen way "Zhu Suan" means the method of calculation of using an abacus. Northern Zhou Dynasty mathematician Zhen Luan noted "the board is divided into three parts, each containing five beads, the upper bead has a different color than the lower four beads. The bead with the different color represents five while the other four represents one." Therefore it was suggested that the abacus existed in the Han Dynasty, taking a different form than those found in modern days. But its representation of five using the upper bead is identical to current abacus. Some historians believe the name of the abacus "Suan Pan" first appeared in the book Jing Xiu Xian Sheng Wen Ji (The Collections of Mr. Jing Xiu) written by scholar Liu Yin in the Yuan Dynasty. The name "Suan Pan" has also appeared in Yuan Qu Xuan (Selected Yuan Dynasty Songs), in the anonymous Pang Ju Shi Wu Fang Lai Sheng Zhai, in which the line went "Being idle, I put my age on the abacus". The Jiu Gui Chu Fa (Nine normalized division) of the abacus was also found in Cheng Chu Bian Tong Suan Bao written by Yang Hui in 1274 and Suan Xue Qi Meng by Zhu Shi Jie in 1299. The book Jiu Zhang Xiang Zhu Bi Lei Suan Fa Da Quan written by Wu Jing contains detailed description of the usage of the abacus. The painting Qing Ming Shang He Tu by Northern Song artist Zhang Ze Duan also contains a drawing of an abacus. Apparently the use of the abacus was wide spread during or before Northern Song Dynasty.
	In the tenth century, the abacus found in Northern Song Dynasty is not that much different from ones we use today. Figure 1-2 shows the various forms of abacus that could be found in the history of China. Elaborate or simple, they still play an important role in people's lives, while some have become antiques and still are an integral component of Chinese culture.
	With the popularity of the abacus, some common ways of its usage have been compiled into rhymes for easy understanding which have been passed down generation to generation. Other books such as Suan Fa Tong Zong have introduced ways of using the abacus to multiply, divide, even to evaluate the square root and cubic root of numbers. During the 1960s, when China was developing its own atomic bombs, the leader of the research team Deng Jia Xian used the abacus and hand-turned computers to calculate the equations for the bomb, which took them nearly a year to accomplish, but laid the foundations for their continued research. If we assume that the abacus is a computer, and the rhymes for using the abacus to compute are simple algorithms, then a group of people using the abacus to calculate would be the term "Distributed Computing". They used oral language to convey information and arrived at the result collaboratively, improving the efficiency of using the abacus when compared with using it independently.
	In fact, China wasn't the only one with computational tools such as abacuses. Civilizations around the globe have developed various tools to aid computation. Some was to use fine sand and draw computational components on the surface, called the sandbox type abacus. Some had lines drawn on the a board and used stones to compute, called the panel type abacus. Although they vary in form, their underlying principle are similar. These rudimentary calculation tools have once been widely used to simplify computation and helped human civilization progress further. Even now some of these tools are still used as a common way of calculation.
2. Slide Rule
	The Slide Rule was once a very popular computational tool apart from the abacus.
	The Slide Rule originated in Europe in the 16th century. During the Renaissance, the European countries made great progress in science and arts. After the Scottish mathematician John Napier introduced logarithms in his book The Construction of the Wonderful Canon of Logarithms, people realized the importance logarithms in mathematical research. Through this opportunity, the Slide Rule was founded.
	The Slide Rule, most often the logarithmic slide rule, as shown in Figure 1-3, consists of three interlocked marked rulers and a sliding window, called a cursor. From its introduction in the 17th century, it has been the most widely used computational tool and dominated scientific and engineering computations for three centuries. Its contribution to the development of human society cannot be diminished.
	The slide rule was introduced between 1620 and 1630, after the publication of the concept of the logarithm. In 1620, The English mathematician Edmund Gunter marked logarithms on a ruler, so he and his colleagues could look up logarithms conveniently. Gunter put the numbers proportionally on a line, thus the numbers are more dense on the left and more sparse on the right. With this ruler, the multiplication of two numbers could be done by measuring the length of the logarithm of the first number by a compass then marking the amount of the two logarithms added. The number pointed to by the compass will be the logarithm of the product of the two numbers.
	Using the basis of this ruler, at approximately 1622, the Anglican priest William Oughtred put two wooden logarithm rulers together and created the first Slide Rule. A few years later he invented the circular slide rule.
	Oughtred's invention made it possible for people to drop the logarithm table or even not knowing what a logarithm was to conduct multiplication by simply moving the slide rule. The slide rule was easy to use and carry around, and relieved people from the numbers.
	As the use of the slide rule grew popular, people made several changes and improvements to it. In 1814, Peter Roget, while delivering his speech to the Royal Society, introduced the double logarithmic slide rule, allowing for solving the power or root of fractions easily. In 1850, the French artillery lieutenant Amédée Mannheim chose four most commonly used logarithm rulers and added a cursor, forming a newer logarithm slide rule. In just a few years, this variation of the slide rule gradually became common with engineers, surveyor-cartographers, chemists and astronomers.
	The manufacturers of the slide rules added more and more symbols and markings so that calculation could be even more convenient, and slide rules for specific subjects were introduced. For instance, the slide rules for chemists had molecular weights while the slide rules for shipbuilding engineers had water pressure formulas, and the slide rules for designers of the atomic bombs had the atomic decay constant inscribed.
	As time went by, the slide rule became paramount. It participated in the construction of the Empire State Building and the Hoover Dam, the design of the suspensions of the Golden Gate Bridge, the automobile hydraulic transmission, the transistor radios and the Boeing 707 airliner. Countless engineers used these simple tools to create engineering marvels.
	But after the invention and improvement of the steam engine, our society progressed into the first industrial revolution, numerous inventions of machinery origin were introduced, and the slide rule was gradually replaced with other machinery, and was gradually phased out of daily use. During this period, it was trendy to try to use machine power to replace manual labor. It is also true with computational tools. People began to invent machines which could handle different functions.

1.1.2 The Mechanical Age
	Our civilization progressed to the mechanical age after the first industrial revolution. In this period of time people started to search for ways of letting machines replace manual labor in order to improve the quality of living. It was also in this period of time that many acute inventors sensed the possibility of using gears, plates, wheels, shafts, bolts and levers, and other mechanical parts to construct a machine capable of conducting mathematical operations, thus forming a mechanical calculator.
	During this period of time many outstanding tools were introduced, from the first Pascal calculators to the Thomas quad-operation calculator, mechanical calculators have become smaller, more robust and convenient, and gradually was able to solve addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, and even getting the square root of a number.
	The invention of manual calculators combined machinery and calculation.
1. Manual Calculators
	The first Manual Calculator was introduced by the French philosopher and mathematician Blaise Pascal in Paris, 1642. But the first truly mechanical calculator, the adder Pascaline, was the predecessor of manual calculators. It could do addition and subtraction. Pascal invented the machine to help his father with the calculation on taxes. With the help of missionaries, several manual calculators were made during the Kangxi period in Qing Dynasty.
	But before explaining the workings behind the manual calculator, let's take a look at Pascal's personal experience. He was born in a French mathematician's family in 1623. His mother passed away when he was three, and was brought up by his father who was a tax official. He expressed interest in science and research very early in his life.
	Young Pascal revered his father. He watched as his father calculated taxes with difficulty and hoped to make a machine to relieve his father of the tedious manual labor. So at the age of 19, he invented the first mechanical calculator in history, which was an adder, shown in Figure 1-4. This adder had six wheels which represented one, ten, hundred, thousand, ten thousand and hundred thousand. He would only have to turn the wheel clockwise to conduct addition, while turning the wheel in the opposite direction would conduct subtraction. The fundamentals of this machine is similar to that of a mechanical watch, and could be recognized as the precursor of computers.

	#TODO
	
	3. The Turing Machine


1.1.3 The First Generation Vacuum Tube Electronic Computers (1946-1957)
	The computers constructed in this period are characterized by using vacuum tubes as the building blocks, using florescent tubes or mercury delayed circuits as memory units and punch cards or tapes as input output interfaces, as shown in Figure 1-10. They were huge, power hungry, slow, having little memory to offer, relatively unreliable, difficult to maintain and extremely expensive to build. In its software level, these computers usually recognized machine code or assembly language, thus the computers in this era were usually used for scientific computation.
	The circuit structures of these computers used vacuum tubes and the programs they executed varied from hand written machine code to symbolic languages. These first generation computers represent the start of the revolution of computational tools. The binary representation and stored programs structures make up the cornerstone of modern electronic computers.
	During the 1930s to 1940s, our civilization buried itself with World War II, prompting disputes globally about the claims of the creator of the first electronic computer.
	It is generally believed that the ENIAC developed by the University of Pennsylvania was the first general-purpose electronic digital computer.

1. ENIAC
	On February 15th, 1946, the first general purpose electronic computer, ENIAC, was successfully completed. It was a monumental success in the history of computers, reaching new heights in the development of computational technology.
	The initial design of ENIAC was introduced by a 36-year-old American engineer John William Mauchly in 1942. The main objective of ENIAC was to analyze the trajectory of cannon shells. The US Ordnance Department funded the research and development of ENIAC, and formed a research group led by Mauchly. The chief engineer was 24-year-old Eckert, one of the members Stan Siegel was a mathematician, and the another was logician Burkes. ENIAC used 18000 vacuum tubes, 1500 relays and other devices. It took up 90 cubic meters, weighed 30 tons, and used 170 square meters of ground. It was a giant, as it needed a room 30 meters long to hold it. Figure 1-11 shows a portion of this computer.
	This computer used 140 kilowatts of power and could do 5000 additions or 400 multiplications per second, and was 1000 times faster than relay computers. When ENIAC went on display, it used 20 seconds to calculate the trajectory of a bomb shell compared with the original 20 minutes. ENIAC uses electrical components to store data, and could complete tens of millions of multiplications every day, which is roughly 40 years for a human to operate a mechanical computer. It uses decimal digits instead of binary digits for arithmatic processing, but has a few vacuum tubes for binary processing, so during its operation, it had to convert a decimal number into binary digits for calculation and convert it back to decimal numbers for output.
	ENIAC was initially used for calculating the trajectory of a bomb shell, but through changing the wiring could let it solve numerous problems, in doing so converting it to a general purpose computer. One of its variants was used in the development of the hydrogen bomb.
	ENIAC, despite its advantages, is also flawed. It uses externally plugged programs. Whenever it has to undertake a new program, the operators would have to rewire the programs, which would take a few or tens of minutes to hours or days depending on the program. It uses decimal digits instead of binary digits, thus increasing its logical and structural complexity and low reliability.
	For a long time most people have believed that ENIAC was the first general purpose electronic computer. But in 1973, the US district court of Minnesota, after years of investigation, determined that the design principles of ENIAC came from the ABC machine completed collaboratively by John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford Berry, so the ABC machine should be the first general purpose electronic computer.
	So what is the ABC machine?

2. ABC machine
	The reason behind the invention of the ABC machine was to reduce the time that students spent on solving linear partial differential equations.
	In the 1930s, John Vincent Atanasoff, an associate professor at the Iowa State University, after seeing his students often having to face a huge amount of computation in solving linear partial differential equations, sought to use digital eletronics to help lessen the load. He decided to use electronic components，use capacitors to store data, and conduct logical operations based on binary numbers. The overall design is outlined in Figure 1-12.
	Atanasoff decided to build this machine with a graduate student Clifford Berry. After four years of experimentation and building, they created a prototype machine in 1939, proving that their theory correct and plausible. This machine was called the "ABC machine", or "Atanasoff-Berry Computer". This computer had 300 vacuum tubes to execute arithmatic and logical operations, and had two memory drums, using capacitors to store data and the voltage to determine its value. The input was reading from a punch card written in binary.
	It is a pity that both Atanasoff and the University did not realize the importance of this computer. In 1942 Atanasoff was recruited by the navy and could not attend to the ABC machine. Furthermore, he did not apply for a patent, and the university dismantled the machines for the vacuum tubes.
	But whether it is the ABC machine or ENIAC, the first electronic tube computers are greatly flawed, and had to be improved. John von Neumann, who also participated in the construction of ENIAC, collaborated with the other participants to research for improvements, and after six months of hard work they reached a satisfactory result. Along with the other participants of ENIAC, von Neumann started an electronic computer with a new architecture, the EDVAC. People generally refer to the results of von Neumann as the first generation computers.

3. EDVAC
	John von Neumann was a Hungarian-American pure and applied mathematician, physicist, inventor, polymath, and polyglot.He was born in Budapest, in October 1903. He was an extraordinary child prodigy in the areas of language, memorization, and mathematics. As a 6-year-old, he could divide two 8-digit numbers in his head. By the age of 8, he was familiar with differential and integral calculus. He received his Ph.D. in mathematics in Budapest at the age of 22 and simultaneously earned a diploma in chemical engineering in Switzerland. After that，he arrived in the United States, and in 1931 he became the first tenured professor at Princeton university.
	In 1944, John von Neumann met a lot of computational problems in the first atomic bomb research work in the United States. Thus, he joined in the ENIAC research team. In the process of research, he discovered the ENIAC shortcomings of the project, and tried to improved them. At the end of June, 1945, he wrote the draft plan of EDVAC. This plan provided a good conditions to improve the computing speed.
	Under the guidance of this theory, the construction of EDVAC took full swing, and was successfully delivered to the Ballistic Research Laboratory in 1949. After some adjustments and improvements, EDVAC was fully operational. Figure 1-13 shows John von Neumann with the fully constructed EDVAC. The computer took 45.5 square meters, weighed 7850 kilograms and used approximately 6000 vacuum tubes and 12000 diodes, which is much less than ENIAC while having a similar running speed. During its operation, it could run up to 20 hours a day, with an error rate of one error every 8 hours on average. It remained in service until 1961 when it was replaced and can be acknowledged as a reliable and buildable computer.
	This architecture is still in effect today. Our computers today still uses the principles of stored programs and program control, so nowadays computers are also called von Neumann architecture computers. von Neumann himself has been honored as "the father of computers" to commemorate his role in developing electronic computers.
	First generation computers such as ENIAC and EDVAC use vacuum tubes as the basic component and mercury delay lines for storage, then gradually they shifted to magnetic storage devices, using puched cards as input and output devices, and primitive system software. During this period, the cost of a computer is very high, the skills it takes to manufacture and operate are very complicated, and the size of the machine is huge, so the usage of computers are generally limited to military and research.
	But as science and technology progresses, in the next few decades, we will see computers becoming miniaturized, cost effective and user friendly. Next we'll discuss how computers changed from generally military use to a modern commodity.

	1.2.2 The Third Generation (1965-19700 ) An Era for Small and Medium-scale Integrated Circuit Computers	In the middle of 1960s, with the development of semiconductor technology, integrated circuits were successfully manufactured. Small and medium-scale integrated circuits became the main components in computers, and semiconductor storage was gradually used as the main storage devices. We can see from Figure 1-20 that, compared to the previous phase, the volume as well as the power consumption (while calculating) of a computer was greatly reduced. Due to the reduction of solder joints and connectors, computers’ reliability is improved further. In terms of the software, with standardized programming languages as well as the man-machine interaction liked Basic language, computers’ applications were further expanded.	In this chapter, the integrated circuits are going to be introduced first.	1.Integrated Circuits	In 1959, the early stage of the development of the second generation computers, J·kilby at Texas Instruments had firstly proposed the integrated circuits with multiple transistors, diodes and resistors combined on a silicon plane. Figure 1-21 shows the first integrated circuit board, with five electronic components connected together by several messy wires. Although it did not look beautiful, but the fact proved that it can perform a much higher working efficiency than those discrete components. The invention of the transistor made up for the shortage of tubes, but very soon engineers just found another new problem. In order to produce and use electronic circuits, engineers had to personally hand-assembled and connected a variety of discrete components, such as transistors, diodes, capacitors and the like. Obviously, this approach was very much impractical. Therefore, Kilby suggested the design of the integrated circuits.	After that, the founder of the Fairchild (Fairchild Semiconductor, The Power Franchise) Robert Noyce proposed a new model named ‘semiconductor device and lead structure’, as shown in Figure 1-22. In 1960,  the Fairchild produced the first integrated circuit that could be put into actually use. Eventually, the method purposed by Noyce was extensively used in the mass production of integrated circuits, as a practical technique. Both Kilby and Noyce are awarded the ‘National Medal of Science’ in the States, and were recognized as the co-inventors of the integrated circuit. After several years’ arguing, the patent of integrated circuit was finally granted to Kilby and Noyce, and integrated circuits indicated the future developing direction of computers.	Developments in this period of time also included the use of the operating system which realized the simultaneous operation of several different programs under the control of the coordination center of the computer. Therefore computers produced from 1964 to 1972 were called IC computers.


	1.3 Computer Peripherals
00	Along with the booming of computer, in order to make more people use computers more conveniently in daily life, to faciliate computers and human interactions, to realize more functions, many external equipments adherence to computers come into being as well.
	The computer people used ordinarily, are equipped with basic configurations keyboard, mouse, computer monitors, mainframe and various USB flash drives as external storage to store huge volumes of data for us. Multimedia devices like speakers and sound cards bring us rich and colorful enjoyment of multimedia content. Network devices such as network card (network interface controller) and router bring us into the world of internet…… A great many computer external equipment make our life even better. However, these are unimaginable back to the time first computer being produced. It is inline with the trend of history, comply with the development of computer culture, dose these configurations develop together and become a inseparable part of computers, imperceptibly popularize in people’s life.
	Following we categorize them and introduce their own process of development in order.
	1.3.1 Input Devices
	In the earlier electronic data processing systems (EDPS), punched card had been widely used. Punched card
